<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="EN" xml:lang="EN">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title>Foreword</title>
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=1366, height=768"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/recollections-of-wartime.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
	<div class="galley-rw">
		<section class="frontmatter-rw Foreword-rw exclude-auto-rw page-open-auto-rw" id="Foreword1" epub:type="frontmatter foreword">


         <div class="title-block-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="title-block4">


            <h1 id="h15">Foreword</h1>

         </div>
<br/><p id="p9">The following article, including the comments below,&#160; appeared in the publication: "<em>News and Views</em>"&#160; ( The official Organ of the Western Union Cable Employees Association, European Division).
         </p>

         <div class="paras-rw blank-line-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="blank-line1">


            <p id="p14">&#160;</p>

         </div>

         <p id="p10">This article was not originally written for the&#160; "<em>News and Views</em>" but was intended as a letter home to "Mum and Dad".
         </p>

         <p id="p11">The writer wishes to remain "Anon", but I believe a number of the Tfc. lads did see this D.F.C. warrior on the 4th floor recently and, although he was wrapped up in 16lbs of plaster (results of this experience) his spirit was typical of thousands of his comrades who took part in smashing up Hitler's Reich.</p>

         <p id="p12">This article is hopefully ended with "To be continued"!!!!&#160; Possibly an account of his P.O.W. experiences will follow. We hope so. Life at Stalag Luft 3 was pretty grim, anyway.</p>
<br/><h4 id="h41">About the Cover</h4>

         <p class="firstpara-rw" id="p103">The Lancaster crew ready to fly</p>

         <p id="p104">Conditions on the plane were basic. It was noisy, cramped and cold. The temperature could drop to -40&#186;C, cold enough to freeze exposed flesh if it touched metal. Early in the war, crews had to pile on layers of clothing.</p>

         <p id="p105">Losses on each flight varied enormously during the war. The acceptable rate was set around five per cent, and the average between 1942-44 was four per cent. This arithmetic is more brutal than it sounds. Less than one crew in eight would survive fifty missions. Half of all aircrew were lost before they had even completed ten missions.</p>

         <p id="p140">Bomber Command crews also suffered an extremely high casualty rate: 55,573 killed out of a total of 125,000 aircrew (a 44.4% death rate), a further 8,403 were wounded in action and 9,838 became prisoners of war.&#160; A Bomber Command crew member had a worse chance of survival than an infantry officer in World War I.</p>

      </section>
	</div>
    </body>
</html>
