<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="EN" xml:lang="EN">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="default-style" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title>BOMBER MISSION PART ONE</title>
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=1366, height=768"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/recollections-of-wartime.css" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
	<div class="galley-rw">
		<section class="body-rw Chapter-rw exclude-auto-rw page-open-auto-rw" id="Chapter1" epub:type="bodymatter chapter">


         <div class="title-block-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="title-block5">


            <h1 id="h16">BOMBER MISSION PART ONE</h1>

            <p class="title-sub-rw" id="title-sub2" epub:type="subtitle">A true story</p>

            <p class="title-other-rw" id="title-sub7"><a href="s051-Section-041.xhtml#Section41">This story starts from Pages 81-82 of the Flying Log</a>
            </p>

         </div>

         <p id="p20">Afternoon of 22 September, 1943...</p>

         <div class="paras-rw blank-line-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="blank-line3">


            <p id="p93">&#160;</p>

         </div>

         <p id="p22">Target for tonight just announced; navigators busy drawing charts, maps, etc., and working out flight plans, discussing target generally, prior to main briefing which was due in an hour's time.</p>

         <div class="paras-rw blank-line-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="blank-line5">


            <p id="p29">&#160;</p>

         </div>

         <p id="p23">Well&#8212;briefing over; target Hanover.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p24">It was to be the first big attack on Hanover; everybody more or less happy, crews busy collecting &#8217;chutes and harness, rubber dinghies and other items air-crew carry along with them. Packing into crew vans and off to the dispersal points in plenty of time to permit last minute check-ups and a last quiet smoke, coupled with that last nervous contraction of &#8220;inner works&#8221; which always accompanies itself with operations.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p25">Twenty five minutes to take off; everyone in aircraft starter acks connected, ground crews waiting the word to go, a truck rolls up&#8212;it's the flying rations. We had given them up for this trip. Also from the truck steps the Navigation Officer wishing us &#8220;<em>all the best</em>&#8221;; words bandied back and forth and then the words &#8220;<em>Port outer</em>&#8221;, followed by a stutter then a steady roar, &#8220;<em>Port inner</em>&#8221;, the roar is much louder, &#8220;<em>Starboard inner</em>,&#8221; &#8220;<em>Starboard oute</em>r&#8221;. All engines start very easily, the ground boys trundle away the starter battery just visible in the gathering dusk.&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p106">Then the Skipper's voice is heard over the inter-com: &#8220;<em>OK chaps, check your mike</em>s.&#8221; Each in turn calls up, making sure all is working clearly; everything must be in perfect working order on the ground, for at 20,000 feet temperatures of twenty to thirty below zero are met with and moisture in a mike means that it will freeze and that's the finish!&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p26">Oxygen equipment checked, all report OK. Navigator checking his instruments, setting first course on &#8220;D.R.&#8221; compass. Engineer checks his instruments for the order &#8220;<em>chocks away</em>&#8221;, and we taxi out on to the perimeter track towards the start of a long line of flares leading away out into the darkness.&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p107">A green flash from an Aldis lamp and we are on the runway, Skipper signals OK and one feels the acceleration pushing one back into his seat, watch the air speed indicator, sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety, one hundred - and we are off. Skip&#8217;s words, &#8220;<em>wheels up</em>&#8221;, twenty four hundred revs, then a few minutes later &#8220;<em>climbing power</em>&#8221;, and now we have to watch the altimeter, high above the earth; time to turn on oxygen, for we have to make more than twice this height.
         </p>

         <p id="p27">Setting course and we are on our way. Now that we are airborne everybody seems quite cheerful. Over the sea, gunners try out their guns and everything working fine. English coast passed from sight, everyone settles down to three, maybe four hours of intense concentration.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p28">&#8220;<em>Enemy coast-pin point-track OK. E.T.A. OK</em>&#8221;. One knows and feels other aircraft around but nothing is seen, the night is very dark. Alteration of course, another hour-and-a-half should bring us to the target. &#8220;<em>Nav</em>.&#8221; checks re-checks, ground speed, wind, busy plotting on chart&#8212;everything depends on TIME.&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p108">Zero hour 21.30. Turning point, course for last leg, very short, twenty odd miles. Then dead ahead the target indicators drop in correct sequence almost one after the other.</p>

         <p id="p109">Bomb aimer takes over, he has twelve thousand pounds of bombs to drop&#8212;one eight thousand pounder and the rest fire bombs. &#8220;<em>Right</em>&#8212;<em>steady. Bomb doors open</em>&#8212;<em>hold it</em>&#8212;<em>Bombs gone! Steady for photograph</em>&#8212;<em>photo taken. Bomb doors closed</em>.&#8221;&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p110">Course set out of target area almost clear, Rear gunner announces &#8220;<em>Fighter port quarter! Prepare to corkscrew port... go!</em>&#8221; The sound of gun fire, our gunners firing, rear and mid upper both firing, a stream of cannon shells past the nose, another just above, we make a hard target to hit. Enemy aircraft breaks off attack and falls away, one engine belching smoke and flame.
         </p>

         <p id="p30">A quick check-up proves that the aircraft has not been hit. &#8220;<em>Bloody good show, gunners!</em> <em>OK pilot turn on to Navigator to give the next course</em>.&#8221; Rear-gunner breaks in &#8220;<em>Enemy aircraft Starboard quarter!</em>&#8221; followed by mid-upper: &#8220;<em>Enemy aircraft port beam!</em>&#8221; &#8220;<em>OK chaps, take one each</em>,&#8221; and Pilot commences corkscrew; enemy attacks&#8212;smell of cordite all over aircraft, suddenly another sound, that of tortured metal being torn apart. An engine coughs and whines as if in agony.&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p111">We have been attacked from below and realise the other two enemy planes were decoys. Pilot feathers propeller on the dead engine and we carry on. Have we shaken them off? A call is made on the inter-com&#8212;no response from the mid-upper back&#8212;what has happened? Engineer answers he will see, he is at flare chute. Compass is now useless and Navigator checks. Pilot orders &#8220;<em>Prepare to abandon aircraft</em>&#8221;&#8212;still no answer from gunners.&#160;
         </p>

         <p id="p112">Another underneath attack, can feel cannon shells strike aircraft with a ripping, tearing sound, the Navigator's table suddenly scatters. Exploding shells, a hit in the leg, splinters flying, hit in the head&#8212;nothing serious but blood flows freely. &#8220;<em>Controls gone, abandon aircraft</em>&#8221;, but no one moves, the aircraft is spinning and try as we might&#8212;it seems we are each and every one glued to our places. No panic&#8212;the aircraft hurtling earthwards and yet inside everyone calm, concerned about the gunners who did not answer. The Wireless Operator staring back into the darkness, the thought &#8220;<em>Well boys, this is it</em>&#8212;<em>tough luck, anyway had a fair spin.</em>&#8221;
         </p>

         <p id="p31">Suddenly the aircraft seemed to stop in mid air, the tremendous pressure was lifted and I was conscious of being hurled forward, striking part of the aircraft, and then everything quiet and a queer sense of freedom coupled with a floating sensation and it dawned on me that I am free of aircraft and I pull ripcord of the &#8217;chute; the canopy opens. What quietness after the screaming of the aircraft&#8212;it seems uncanny.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p32">A muffled bang and down below a pin-point of light gradually growing larger, it dawns on you it's your aircraft burning. Your mind is troubled, trying to recall the last glimpses of your comrades, how many got out&#8212;was fate working her funny little tricks? You offer up a small prayer, perhaps you are not religious in the strict sense of the word, yet it comes natural.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p143">Woosh!&#160;</p>

         <p id="p113">Branches, trees, a jerk and one is hanging, the &#8217;chute, caught in the topmost branches of the trees. Just hanging and it&#8217;s very dark. One feels numb, can see and hear aircraft ammunition exploding about five hundred yards away. Feeling around and kicking legs, but can make no contact and you realise you must be too far out to reach branches. Harness starting to cut off circulation of legs, so reach up and grasp harness above head to ease the strain and find a lot of loose cords. You realise that half the &#8217;chute has collapsed and is hanging loosely down.</p>

         <p id="p33">At this moment a German fighter drops a stick of flares across the forest, marking the track of the bomber force out for his mates, I suppose? Anyway, it makes a light and I can see around. I can see the nearest branch, very small, about seven or eight feet away and a bit below. Try swing &#8217;chute&#8212;no can't make it. Can also make out ground, it looks miles down. A torch zigzagging through the woods and I hang quiet. This person is evidently making for the burning aircraft.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p114">He has passed on and I get out my knife (I remember it is one I bought in Suez) and cut eight or nine of the silk cords that are hanging loose and knot these firmly together, each one would be about six or seven feet long. Whilst cutting the cords I find broken branches tangled in them and pick out the heaviest which I tie on to the end and then pay out the cord. I am trying to get some idea of the height. I get to the end of my cord and the stick still seems to be off the ground, whether it had caught in a branch lower down I could not say, anyway, estimated height at sixty to seventy feet. I hauled in the line and decided to try and slide down.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p115">Each of these cords are tested for a breaking strain of 400 lb and, as you know, silk is very strong. You can guess that they are not very thick&#8212;about the thickness of window sash cord I should say. By this time my legs were completely numb, so feeling in the harness above my head I tied the cord securely and the other end I tied to my leg so that if it did get away from me would get pulled up before hitting the ground. Was very careful and paid the surplus line over my knee so that it would run evenly.</p>

         <p id="p94">It was still very dark, the flares had gone out and was doing most of this by feel&#8212;very muddled feel at that, for head was banging away as if a flak battery was firing all its guns at one time. I turned the safety buckle, gave it a bang with the palm of my hand, at the same time holding on to the harness with the other Blessed release! I grasped the harness with both hands and hung on letting the blood circulation return to my legs.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p116">Now for the big try out. I felt around, grasped the cord and started down. It began to burn my hands and just at that moment something went wrong, for I turned completely upside down and was hanging by one leg about ten feet below where the harness joined the chute. There was I, gently turning round and round. I since wonder if it was God who had a hand in it for, looking back, I have no doubt that had it not got tangled I should never have made it.</p>

         <p id="p34">Taking stock of my position I realised that I could now make out shapes around me, due to the moon rising, which automatically registered direction. I could see twiggy branches, some seven or eight feet away, and by desperate efforts got myself swinging in their direction. At last I could reach, but unfortunately as soon as the weight came on them they broke away, and another swing out into space. Back again&#8212;a wild clutch and I would grasp a solitary leaf which would come away in my hand. I wonder, have you ever experienced that thought of frustration only to grip your teeth and carry out whatever you intended despite the consequences? I can say right here that I was crying with rage and cursed everything and everybody, and then I grasped a twig that held! Gingerly I felt my way along it, the twig joined another giving it added strength and myself added confidence. I pulled some more, another junction, I was blessing and praying now.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p95">What a difference changed circumstances make. A man will be definite when he thinks there is no chance, yet give him a straw and he feverishly grasps it. You take a breath and a life time passes. You are a boy again, your home scenes that have lain dormant in your subconsciousness now rises to the surface.&#160;</p>

         <p id="p117">A loud explosion brings you back to the present. Part of the aircraft has blown up. God! What about Goldie, Reg, Pat, Don? Another breath, another flash, back to the forgotten past. Omar Khayyan this time. Have you every read Omar Khayyam's &#8220;Rubaiyat"? Do so as soon as possible and you will find this which passed through my mind -</p>

         <div class="block-rw extract-verse-rw exclude-auto-rw" id="extract-verse1">


            <div class="poem-rw stanza-rw" id="stanza1">


               <p id="p35">&#8220;This all a chequer board of nights and days,</p>

               <p id="p36">Where Destiny with Man for pieces plays,</p>

               <p id="p37">Hither and thither moves, and mates, and slays</p>

               <p id="p38">And one by one back in the closet lays&#8221;</p>

            </div>

         </div>

         <p id="p39">To be continued...</p>

      </section>
	</div>
    </body>
</html>
